Hello and welcome back to the course in
R programming. In the previous tutorial
we learned how to import data and we
looked at two methods and today we're
going to explore our data set so let's
get straight to it. I'm just going to
continue in the same file and all I'm
going to do is just put a separator here
so there we go that's our file, that's
our data so stats. How would you
explore the data that you have
imported right? How would you go about
exploring it, looks just like that in
here exploring data. Well one way is just
run the line and see what comes up and
just look at your data set over
here but as you can see we have quite a
large data set.
It's over a hundred rows actually, a
hundred ninety five rows and it's like
there's a lot of data to look at
visually and you kind of get lost and
imagine if you had even more columns or
even more rows you'd get more lost.
So what are the ways that we could
explore some data? Well there are a
couple of functions that will come in
handy and the best way to learn these is
to kind of just write them down probably
and then when she would use them a
couple of times on different datasets
then you will remember them because
there is quite a few and you definitely
want to remember them right away but as
you start new projects on and on and on
and you use these functions you will get
used to them. So the first function is nrow,
it's basically just tells you the number
of rows. So 195 and because we have a data
frame right so we always know it'll be a
two-dimensional object, it has some
columns with names and then a number of
rows so in the number of rows can be
important sometimes and especially if
you want to check the backgrounds and
consulting it was very important for us
to always ordered what we're doing
always have a trail and once you've
imported data like we did here, you would
always have to count the rows and like
we mostly did data import them to sequel
and you would have to count the rows and
then actually put a comment like this
saying here,
imported a hundred ninety-five rows, so
for verification so if something goes
wrong you can always come back and check
that actually a
I can see where the mistake was that we
imported less rows than we actually
supplied or something like that. So
always a good thing to do after you've
imported the file check the number of
rows and does it make sense? Is it a
reasonable number of rows of what you
expected? Number of columns, stats, so
here, and once again stats is just a name of an
object, it could have been anything else.
That's what we're supplying to the
function so number of columns is five
and basically yeah we can actually see
that there's five but if there were like
a hundred columns or you you would use
this function to once again assess how
you've imported the data or basically
if it's a new data set that you're not
really familiar with, you might want to
know how many columns there are so you know
what to expect. Next comes a pair of
functions which I will, you always
keep getting this one wrong or
kept getting this one wrong, so it's
called head and what it does it tells
you the top six rows so just basically
if you have a large data sets like we do and
doesn't fit into this screen, if you just
want to look at the top five rows then
you just type in head stats and then you
will see it's all five rows. Why is that convenient?
Well because it actually shows you the
column names and not just by themselves
because it shows the column names and
some sample data right away, so you can
kind of get a feel for what the data set
looks like. The other function that
comes in pair with the previous one is
tail stats and this one shows you the
past, the bottom six rows. So this way,
same thing you see the columns, column names
and you see the bottom six rows. So that's
useful if your data is ordered by
alphabetically like ours is, this is ordered by
country code. So you can see what's at
the bottom and like maybe there's
different things going on here so like
kind of a different sample of the data
and the way to remember it is and I
always kept thinking top because in
sequel, in SQL basically the
function is called top and I always kept
getting along the way to remember it is
think of a fox right? A fox has a head
and a tail, so basically that's what
you're doing, you look at the head and
you look at the tail and it's that's the
way I remembered it
and maybe that will be helpful for you.
Alright and other thing is with these
functions, you can always say comma and
equals whatever 10 and I'll give you
more rows or same thing here and equals
8 gives you eight rows instead of 6. So if you want to see
a bit more than just type in that.
Alright and so what is the next function?
The next function is str and str stands
for structure. So if we're on str and
pass it our data frame, then what
will get back is a quick debrief of this
data frame and what's going on in there
so first we get the number of rows,
195, number of columns
5 and then it tells you a little bit
about every single one of these columns.
So let's have a look at them, so country
name it says factor of a hundred ninety
five levels. Now in order to understand
what a factor is, let's first start with
the income group because it'll be a bit
easier that way. Factor with four levels
and so what could that mean? Well what
that means is that there's a variable
here which has been taken as a
categorical variable so we've got lower
middle-income, low-income and I can tell
right now we have lower middle-income,
upper-middle income, low income and
high-income. So four types of income
groups or four different income groups we
have here and so R has picked that up. R
has understood that this is not just
some random text that we from place here
it's actually a factor so we want we
might want to group all data based on
this information sometime later and what
R does is it assigns numbers so the
science numeric values to these words to
these strings attaches to them. So here
you've got an example with four levels
high income is one of them and then
comma etc. and then it tells you how the
numbers,
what number is it has a science. So it's science
number 124411 so if you look here, not
in the last rows, in the first rows, if
you look here, you'll see 1244 so that's how its
assigned the values, attached the values
and basically that's R's way of dealing
with categorical variables and for us,
they're called factors.
Now what R has also done it
has assumed that the country name and
the country code are also factors, so it
ended up of 195 levels and for us it
doesn't really matter we're not going to
use those variables so we don't really
mind what R does with like how R treats
them in the background for itself but
it's also good check for us now we know
that indeed there's no duplicates because
it's a hundred ninety five rows and R
has picked up a hundred ninety five
different levels and same thing for the
country code.
Ok and also we have birth rate. It's, R
has told us that it's a numeric value
and internet users also a numeric value
and it's just giving you some examples so
that's the str function and actually
it's one of my favorite functions
because if I were conducting a job
interview, if I was interviewing somebody
for a data scientist position position
there would be two functions that I
would ask him like off the bat right? The
first thing I would ask would be what
does a str stand for and what does run
if stand for?
Because these functions have such tricky
names, people who don't know are well
enough will inevitably get them wrong
right away because str in many other
languages means the string, right? It
means convert something to a string or
working with strings and so on. So
like a set of characters and so unless
you actually know that in R it stands for
structure, you'll get that one wrong and
R runif what that does is it even I
can see that
like I read it read wrong in the proper
way is runif because it stands for
random variables distributed uniformly,
so remember we had rnorm, so that was
same thing R stands for random, norm is the
type of distribution, same thing here. R
stands for random, unif stands for a type
of distribution. If you don't know R
well enough, you will assume that that
probably means run an operation if
something is correct right? So just just
a trick there or kind of a heads-up, just
you should probably remember these two
functions if you happen to be at a job
interview where I'll be interviewing you
which is very unlikely I guess.
Anyway so that's str stats and then the
next one would be summary, summary stats
and let's have a look at that.
So summary basically gives you a
breakdown for every single column in a
different way so str is very quick, this
give takes like a bit of space, it's like a
box, so here basically the these
are categorical variables, there's nothing
interesting about them.
It tells you how many fall in each level,
so how many high-income? How many
low-income? That's pretty interesting I guess,
then for a numeric variables it tells
you the minimum, the first quartile, the
median, the mean a third quartile and the
maximum. Same thing for this variable
here so it kind of gives you the
breakdown so you can understand what
type of distributions you have here or
where what the ranges are for your data
so you wouldn't even try looking for
birth rate over 50 because it doesn't
exist you can see right away and same
thing for internet users. This is a good
validation and it tells you that
yep your data is between zero and a
hundred so it is a percentage which is
great.
Ok that's all for today, I hope those
functions come in handy when you're
exploring your data sets and for us they
have already told us a little bit about
our data set which we will start slowly
digging into from the next tutorial and
I look forward to seeing you then until
next time happy coding.